H faxadmin should let you enter the type of fax modem
M faxmove program, analogous to lpmove
L faxmon program, analogous to mailbox, but with %done-%rejected
	indicator.
D fax manager under vadmin for queue control and examination

L workspace ftrs for tif, fax
H graphic design of
	- cover sheet
	- tiff and fax file icons
	- faxmon and fax manager icons
D page at a time viewer with scaling to page size
	will image kit viewer be ready in time?
M graphical fax composition tool
	To send a fax from a graphical program, would like a
	graphical way of doing the sending, as opposed to printing
	to a postscript file and doing sendfax.
H api for integration with applications
	does it need to look like a printer?
	what does a printer look like to an application?

D dispatch incoming fax by mail
D	faxd should system a program to dispatch incoming mail.
	Writing the program is harder.
	Remember to look into ANSI fax cover page standard.
L rethink barcode/user database
	The barcode is currently the user's name.
	It doesn't worry about uniqueness.
D patch security holes in faxServerApp
	The q contains pathnames referring to the doc to be faxed.
	faxServerApp doesn't check to make sure pathname was created
	by fax.recv.  Someone could create a q file referring to a
	pathname owned by someone else, and fax themselves a file
	they're not otherwise allowed to look at.
		faxd.recv runs as fax-user.
		faxd runs setuid fax-user, and sets ruid to euid.
		So docs referred to by q file must be readable by
		fax-user.  Perhaps adding a check for ownership by
		fax-user suffices?
D accounting
H documentation
D	man pages
	installation manual(s) for user and server
L Class 1 modem support
D Class 2 modem support

D resize and/or delay imaging until client capabilities are negotiated
	(implies moving imaging to back end)
D do group 3 page width+length negotiation (p. 102 of T.30)
	(depends on moving imaging to back end)

H make fax server and fax client software "inst"able

D before it opens syslog, faxd writes diagnostics to stdout/stderr
	(TIMEOUT: opening modem)
D fix faxstat to get relevant info about the job being sent
XB retries should resend the cover page, but not other pages
B handle send capabilities (resolution, min scanline time)
	on a page-by-page basis
D fix area code handling (foreign country codes)
D fix problem with international transmission
D fax2ps should handle 2D G3 encoding.
XB ps2tif needs to read PS header comments for # of pages to
	- make cover page
	- tag lines (page i of n)
	- collate pages (??? where should this be done, if at all?)

D recover from modem failure/lockup better
M support abort of transfer

D use TSI for access control (p. 104 of T.30)
	A fax machine has an id it transmits when it calls up
	another fax machine.  Can specify the set of id's to
	accept faxes from to prevent junk faxes.
D integration with mail readers
	at least providing enough info that mail readers can
	be made smart enough to use the right viewer.
	see paper/rfc1049.

L enable switching between use of modem as fax modem and as data modem.

? track pages transmitted and only do restransmit of partial page
	(what about cover page)
? queue dispatch of incoming fax until modem is idle? (sam: huh?)
	(gives priority to reading from tty)
? local spooling?
	If sendfax can't contact faxd.recv, it gives up.
	Could spool locally until local daemon can contact
	faxd.recv, but that may defeat the big feature of
	fax: immediacy.
? caller receiving protocols
	need marketing input for prioritization

D rc2.d function to start faxd, with correct setuid
D faxrm program, analogous to lprm
D fax device installation setup
D faxadmin program, analogous to lpadmin
D time-to-send option to sendfax? or should people just use at?
D put flock back into faxServerApp

D = done
H = high priority, can't ship without it
B = outright bug, must fix before ship
M = medium priority, can probably ship without it
L = low priority, can probably wait indefinitely
X = don't agree with robin
? = not prioritized yet
